. . .The idea that life and mind are, in some ways, manifestations of a common set of principles can enrich the understanding of both. But it also mandates not confusing the two manifestations— not forgetting what it is (a gene? an entire organism? the mind of a person?) that knows something, or tries something, or wants something, or acts selfishly. I suspect that the biggest impediment to accepting the insights of evolutionary biology in understanding the human mind is in people’s tendency to confuse the various entities to which a given mentalistic explanation may be applied.

One example is the common tendency to assume that [Richard] Dawkins’ portrayal of ‘selfish genes’ implies that organisms in general, and people in particular, are ruthlessly egoistic and self-serving. In fact, nothing in the selfish-gene view predicts that this should be so. Selfish genes are perfectly compatible with selfless organisms, since the genes’ goal of selfishly replicating themselves can be implemented via the sub-goal of building organisms that are wired to do unselfish things such as being nice to relatives, extending favours in certain circumstances, flaunting their generosity under other circumstances, and so on. (Indeed, much of [Dawkin’s book] The Selfish Gene consists of explanations of how the altruism of organisms is a consequence of the selfishness of genes.)

Another example of this kind of confusion is the common claim that sociobiology is refuted by the many things people do that don’t help to spread their genes, such as adopting children or using contraception. In this case, the confusion is between the motive of genes to replicate themselves (which does exist) and the motive of people to spread their genes (which doesn’t). Genes effect their goal of replication via the sub-goal of wiring people with certain goals of their own, but replication per se need not be among those sub-sub-goals: it’s sufficient for people. . .to nurture their children. In the environment in which our ancestors were selected, people pursuing those goals automatically helped the relevant genes pursue theirs, but when the environment changed, the causal chain that used to make sub-goals bring about superordinate goals no longer were in operation.

I suspect that these common fallacies arise from applying a Freudian mindset to evolutionary psychology. People conceive of the genes as the deepest, truest essence of a person, the part that harbours his deepest wishes, and think of conscious experience and overt behaviour as a superficial veneer hiding these ulterior motives. This is a fallacy because the motives of the genes are entirely different from the motives of the person—they are a play within a play, not the interior monologue of a single cast of players.
More generally, I think it was the ease of confusing one level of intelligence with another that led to the proscription of mentalistic terms in behaviourism and to the phobia of anthropomorphizing organisms or genes in biology. But as long as we are meticulous about keeping genes, organisms, and brains straight, there is no reason to avoid applying common explanatory mechanisms (such as goals and knowledge) if they promise insight and explanation.

