The word “surreal” is a common linguistic property. . . . Useful as it may be, “surreal” is, on closer inspection, something of a misnomer. It comes from the French surréalisme, which translates into English as “super-realism”. . . . But surrealism—as a style—is not hyper-realistic or ultra-realistic. It’s just the opposite, in fact. . . . In real life, you won’t find lobsters on telephone cradles, clock-faces that flop over table-ends like soft-fried eggs.

The term, art history records, originated in Parisian studios and manifestos in the early 1920s. Surrealism’s founders were André Breton, Louis Aragon, Salvador Dali, Max Ernst, Marcel Duchamp, Yves Tanguy, Man Ray—a coterie of internal and external exiles. It was, initially, as much a literary as an artistic movement and, as such, produced wonderfully effective publicity for itself. Mediocre as some of the later products are—avoid, for example, that dreary Dali exhibition down on London’s South Bank—surrealism has always generated first-rate PR.

Later than much of Europe, Britain began to wake up to surrealism in the summer of 1936, with the International Surrealist Exhibition at London’s New Burlington Gallery. . . . On the opening day, the crush was so great that traffic in Piccadilly was brought to a standstill. All the big foreign names were there. The event was immortalised by Salvador Dali giving a lecture in a deep-sea diving suit. Famously, he had to be extracted, suffocating, from his metal helmet with pliers. It is not recorded whether the lecture was otherwise a success. That image was lodged in the British mind as a defining icon. The press spluttered with universal indignation at this “practical joke” on the British people. . . .

Surrealism in the pre-war years was not merely an art movement. It had political muscle. Walter Benjamin, the great Marxist critic, hailed its rupture of traditional connections as revolutionary. Surrealism was a necessary jolt to the bourgeois world. It disconnected things. Dali, in his less frivolous moments, proclaimed paranoia and nightmares the truly creative and truth-telling mental conditions. These were the rich codes of the unconscious in which surrealism spoke. Breton called the artists’ language “psychic automatism”. You can track Freud and his Interpretation of Dreams everywhere in surrealism’s snow. . . .

In Britain surrealism was promoted by Roland Penrose (then an artist, later an art world panjandrum) and the anarchist critic Herbert Read (motto: “To hell with culture!”). They were the organisers of the 1936 exhibition. But surrealism, like Marxism, never took root in the UK. Not English, as Mr Podsnap would say. Nor would it find a home in the countries of the fascist axis (Germany, Spain, Italy), where it was firmly placed in the category of Goebbels’ Entartete Kunst, degenerate art. Nicht Deutsch, either. In Britain, only a handful of names are routinely cited as having been practitioners of surrealism or, to some degree, influenced by it: Humphrey Jennings, Graham Sutherland, Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon. . . .

Surrealism was obstinately resisted by the postwar Britain in which I grew up. Social realism of the kitchen-sink variety was the favoured mode—even among the rebellious young. When Dali’s Crucifixion went on display in Glasgow, it was attacked by an enraged MacPodsnap with an umbrella. Nae Scottish. Britain, as in so many things, would not be ready for surrealism until it was safely passé.

